How long have you been learning English?
I want you to learn it effectively, to become a better developer.
In this video I will tell you how to continue learning English and NOT getting stuck.
And I will give you 10 tricks that helped me.
I'm not going to stop at reasons to learn English.
You already know them.
In a few words, in our modern
actively changing world
which becomes more global,
you can't progress too far as a programmer,
until you, at least, will be able to read,
and, even better, to listen to technical English content.
Which I will refer in future a lot, by the way.
I'm not even talking about communicating with foreign coworkers.
This video is intended for those who can solve "Hello world" tasks like,
talking about myself or about the weather outside the window.
So if you can't — it's not a problem. Just start studying with English teacher as soon as possible,
so you could handle tasks like that.
So, maybe you're that guy,
who's learning English REALLY HARD.
Maybe you use free tools like Lingualeo or Puzzle-English or something else,
or you use English teachers and spend a lot of money on that.
Both ideas are great. But at some point
you may notice that your progress slows down for some reason.
I don't know if you noticed that,
but you can spend YEARS learning English
and still not being able to handle tasks like watching a programming video course,
or, say, a video from conference in English.
Or maybe you are able to handle that,
but now you are afraid to talk to foreign coworker or client.
That's strange. It's the whole point of it, isn't it?
Why it's so hard to achieve it? I think, unfortunately, the answer is
all these English learning tools: services, courses, teachers and so on,
they are just a sandbox.
It's sort of an intro to English. It doesn't really matter how much time you spend on it.
Now you can argue that teachers and other stuff
help to prepare for English tests, like IELTS, while they are not really simple.
And that's right, they are specialized in that.
But English teacher will NEVER be able to discuss our specific topics with us:
functional programming
or imperative programming,
static typing or dynamic typing.
What architecture
should we choose for this distributed system?
No, they won't be able to discuss these topics with us. They are not specialized in these areas.
They are specialized exactly in the stuff they teach: English grammar, and these common limited tasks.
About family, weather, hobbies or maybe something more complex, like economics.
But these topics have almost nothing to do with us.
In the best case they will be able to discuss computers from user perspective or something similar.
I'm not saying that studying with teacher is not effective,
don't get me wrong.
It's effective, when you take into account limitations of such education.
So the first thing you need to admit is,
if you are JUST focused on learning ENGLISH,
and NOT focused on learning OUR topics USING English,
then you will stuck.
Actually you don't even need
some crazy grammar level to watch courses and read articles about programming.
Or to leave comments at GitHub bug report page,
or to EVEN talk to a foreign coworker!
I encourage you to watch this free course,
all the links will be in the description.
You can use this course as a grammatical and lexical minimum that you need
to start doing the things I mentioned.
If your grammar progressed beyond that — then you might be wasting your time.
You are NOT going to use such complex grammar in the NEAR future and will likely forget it.
Two more things about grammar:
First of all, kids actually don't learn grammar while they are just starting to learn their native language,
just because there's no system to describe grammar which could be available for them, as they don't speak any language.
But it's not a problem.
They quickly learn how to describe stuff that happens in their head,
just by combining the phrases that they were able to remember from other person.
And the second point about grammar:
if you was learning our native language long time ago, using textbooks and other stuff,
then you likely noticed, that you
don't remember some parts of the grammar!
I'm not sure what exactly you may not remember, but for instance,
I wouldn't be able to recall anything about
verb conjugations in Russian language.
I encourage you to think about this stuff: why it's happening and how this knowledge may help
with foreign languages learning process optimization.
The next two videos will help you with that: one of them
is from EXTREMELY important course
about learning techniques for everything, not just natural language.
This course is CRITICAL for you, by the way.
I will mention it in the future as well.
And another video, from one GREAT English teacher!
I encourage you to watch ALL his content about learning techniques, which have been proved by studies.
Now I want to move on to the main part of our topic,
to discuss tricks that helped me to progress in English the most.
We will start from pretty obvious techniques and will go to less obvious ones.
Technique #1: Don't use Russian
when learning English.
I think that learning English language using Russian language is...
completely absurd!
You may disagree with me. But if you study with a personal teacher,
I really encourage you to ask them to NOT use Russian AT ALL during lessons,
and notice what effect it will produce to you.
Imagine that THEY don't know Russian and YOU don't know Russian.
And you will both do whatever you can.
Using vocabulary that you already have. Using intonation and gesticulation.
Don't underestimate gesticulation!
It's a very powerful tool to explain things.
So, if you completely refuse using Russian at your lessons
this will stimulate you to switch to Russian less often.
Now English will become an exciting puzzle!
Yes, it may create a little lag in the plan you have with the teacher.
But you know, this plan is a freaking sandbox!
It's not important.
It's important to start USING the language! To practice it FOR REAL!
To solve PROBLEMS with it!
EXPLAIN and UNDERSTAND things that YOU really CARE about!
It's not talking about the freaking weather outside the window!
So the first thing that becomes important to you automatically
is not weather and not even programming.
It's English itself.
At this point you may experience problems with translating words from English to Russian and vice-versa.
But at the same time you will easily explain meaning of an English word using other English words!
It's exactly what you need!
It can remind you so-called compiler bootstrapping.
As C++ compiler can be written in C++,
the same way, English can be and SHOULD BE learned with English itself! As soon as possible.
As I'm not going to contradict myself, I will continue this discussion in English.
(hilarious Runglish-speaking gentleman)
So turn on subtitles if you don't understand English speech and we will continue.
#2: Start GRADUALLY replacing Russian content with English content.
Do you read articles at habr.com?
That's great! Many of them are translations from English.
So every time you are going to read a translation,
instead try to read the original article.
Podcasts, audio books, video blogs at YouTube.
The same thing.
Try original YouTube channels
instead of watching dubbed videos.
You may have noticed that many vlogs and audio books
were recorded with high quality.
And I don't just mean microphone quality or something,
I also mean the voice. People really train their voice before performing this way.
Ommm... Lower! Ommm... Lower! Ommm...
And basically you say
The letter Q, then E, then Q, then A-A-h.
So it's not really authentic voice that you may hear between native Americans. It's actually
much simpler.
If you normally listen to music while driving your car or using public transport
— try to update this habit with English audio books or podcasts.
And one thing that you SHOULD be aware of is you don't need to understand ALL the little
details you hear, inclusively.
You need to get the idea, the main parts!
This is the point of
any content you use, including Russian content.
You may have noticed that you can't
watch a video and then retell
all the little details to somebody,
word for word.
We normally remember only MAJOR stuff, so major stuff is THE ONLY needed stuff.
Don't worry about ignoring SOME PARTS of the videos.
Sometimes when we don't understand something IMPORTANT
it's likely you will understand it later from context of the same video.
#3: Prefer English over Russian when taking notes.
If you are going to make a list of food,
why won't you make it in English?
It's not that hard.
Also so your internal tasks
and reminders — you can write them in English as well.
Video courses.
Writing quality notes for video courses is very important.
I wrote an entire article about that
link in the description.
So if you are watching some English video course
why won't you write your notes in English as well?
It could be actually EASIER to do that instead of making a translation to Russian.
And you will have a better FOCUS on your course in this case.
This is where you're using English
in the problems that YOU are personally facing in your life.
It's no some theoretical stuff
you had in textbooks.
#4: Stop using Russian LOCALIZATION on any
of your devices!
It's time to STOP!
Start using ALL software in English!
On your desktop, on your laptop, on your phone,
your tablet or whatever else.
And also you will benefit from using English on
the devices that you don't even own.
Self-ordering machines, for instance.
Do you order some
junk food using such device?
That's fine. Now try to use English every time you do that.
Or, for example, many ATMs will let you choose the language after inserting your
payment card.
So you could select English and then withdraw or deposit your money.
Don't be afraid of this stuff
there are not too many things you can do with ATM.
#5: Find ugly parts on the language in Google.
Every natural language has its own poorly designed
things.
For English one of them is probably prepositions.
When you are doing
any kind of writing, instead of guessing which preposition you should use,
or instead of using some complex rules,
just Google the particular combination of words and check how many results you will get.
In many cases you will find discussions which will tell you what is valid and what is not.
Or what particular combination of words means if several ways are possible.
#6: Improve your ability to LISTEN by practicing ACCURATE PRONUNCIATION.
I noticed the more I practice pronunciation the better I actually hear
the native English speech.
Notice that you will likely never be able to do that with your
non-native English teacher. If you have one.
You already pronounce things wrong and you keep
replacing the wrong pronunciation. Without even noticing that.
And as you repeating it you are
REINFORCING your WRONG MEMORY about that!
That could do the reason why you can't even HEAR
the right authentic pronunciation!
Just think about that.
And to fix that, one thing that you can try
is singing songs that YOU personally enjoy.
This is how you can learn and practice
authentic English pronunciation. In a very enjoyable fashion.
It's very important that you
choose the songs that YOU personally like.
It doesn't matter how complex they are
Maybe they use some advanced vocabulary,
that you are not familiar with.
and that's fine, that's still
not the point of this exercise.
Though you will probably see mistakes in lyrics.
So don't ignore them.
Correct the mistakes every time you notice them.
And it doesn't even matter how fast it is
You can slow the song down, if it's too fast for you.
The main goal is to be as accurate as the singer
and of course I mean the pronunciation,
not your pitch accuracy or something.
Record your voice, review it and work on mistakes.
The other thing that you could try is
to simulate native English teachers.
Here's one example of the teacher who teaches
the American fast speech.
Alright, another question "what do you mean?"
I never ask it like that! "hey, what do you mean?"
That's just too complicated, right?
So I say "no, [wotduu] mean?", "[wotduu] mean?"
"how did it go?"
But I never say
"how did it go"! I say "hey, [hada] go?", "[hada] go?"
Now, this is crazy, because I'm not even sayin' "how"
I'm saying "ha"!
#7: Try to THINK in English every time you are walking outside.
I came up with this technique maybe 10 years ago or something,
when I was a student.
Every time I was
going home alone, I was noticing that my inner voice is basically
talking some random stuff.
And I started to play with it.
I was trying to switch it to English,
even though I didn't know English so well at that time.
So the challenge was to
either generate some English phrases
or just to be silent.
When I just "invented" this technique
I was doing this for maybe several minutes and then I was switching back to Russian
but after some practicing something clicked in me and I basically didn't need to use
Russian anymore while walking on the streets.
So that was probably the MOST EFFECTIVE
practice for SPEAKING that I have ever used.
And I'm still surprised that many teachers
probably won't ever tell you about that.
It's RIDICULOUSLY simple and at the same time
VERY powerful!
So if you are a shy and you don't want to practice your speaking
with somebody — you can actually practice it WITH YOURSELF.
Yes, there's still a problem with
verification of the stuff that talk about.
But it's definitely more productive than
going like a zombie and generating some random Russian nonsense
instead of English random nonsense.
#8: Simplify your thoughts.
Our native language is a very complex thing
And sometimes
It's hard to express our Russian thoughts in other language.
Because we don't know
this language so well. Or because of the lack of some concepts in this language.
So every time you experience that, notice what's actually important.
what MESSAGE are you trying to deliver.
Don't focus on little things you can't remember,
or you're not sure about.
Get rid of all the unnecessary things or generalize them.
Generalizing means selecting a word with more general meaning.
#9: Memorize valid phrases and use them to build build new valid phrases.
You may have noticed that memorizing single words, without context, just doesn't work.
It's not effective!
It's not how our brain works.
We need to ASSOCIATE words together!
Combinations of words — this is what we memorize effectively.
And I hope you already have some benefit from that.
Just by COMBINING some parts that you have heard from somebody,
you can produce grammatically correct and beautiful speech in many cases.
But what if I tell you that you can memorize longer combinations? The entire sentences.
And modify them during actually talking IN REAL TIME.
Let's take a look at example
Suppose you want to express some strange complex idea
Using passive form of present perfect tense.
Or something similar.
And you are like "damn I didn't practice this thing so much!
I'm not sure how to say it's right."
What you can do though is to RECALL some phrase,
which could be very similar to what you want to say.
For instance, you can recall something like
"I have been told that studying algorithms
is very important".
And you also need to remember that "told" is
In the past participle form here. And the word "have" is in the relation with "I".
And now, to get what you want, you just update some parts of this sentence,
with words
in the same form. And maintain the consistency of the grammar.
"They have been told
that studying algorithms is very important"
"This code has been written
by me".
Or whatever.
It's like a change of variables in mathematics.
And I think it's the NATURAL way to use the language.
It's different from using
those walls of text.
You can't just visualize such things in your head, while actually talking.
Our temporary memory is way more limited.
So I want YOU to find the valid phrases
that you personally find hard to build.
And just memorize them. And after
memorizing them, trying to PLAY with them, while actually talking in real time.
And finally, the last technique!
#10: Listen and dub
videos that you personally like.
And try to simulate a professional
translation to Russian.
No, no, no! Not some shitty translation,
but a PROFESSIONAL one!
This is actually an advanced technique.
I think it's useful for those of you who want to improve your English from
upper-intermediate to advanced level.
And this technique may sound like a contradiction to the first technique, which was
Don't use Russian when learning English.
But actually it's just a different technique,
for different purposes.
It's designed to improve your listening first of all and your vocabulary.
You will learn new phrasal verbs and modern idioms.
I personally started to play with video dubbing
in 2015. And I remember I didn't even have any subtitles,
even auto generated.
So it was a bit challenging.
Sometimes I literally listened to some parts of the videos
for 20 times on different speeds,
until I could actually get things right.
Sometimes I was skipping some strange parts
and eventually I could understand them later from context
of the same video.
So in complex cases it's like a puzzle:
you're trying to guess the right interpretation,
by combining
the parts you have already heard
and by understanding the context.
After translating a relatively short video
30 minutes of something, I improved my listening skills dramatically.
Just from one video!
You need to choose a video with a bit HIGHER level than you currently have.
It's very important!
So, I mean the video that contains some minor parts that you don't understand while watching it.
When you was watching it,
it was okay to not understand some minor parts.
But now it's time to figure them out!
Which may not be
as simple as you may think.
In some cases you will find stuff that you just couldn't see in textbooks,
like new idioms or culture-related jokes,
or just very complex terminology
which you will likely want to validate with official translations of the books or articles that
affect the same topic.
And obviously you can't rely on... whatever is written here, it's all a big lie!
Not only auto generated, but any subtitles.
It's the same thing as with lyrics for songs.
Now I want to share you the tools
that I use to translate the videos.
context.reverso.net — this tool takes a phrase as input,
and shows a translation in a context of some text.
It's probably the most common tool I use.
It's very important to see the words in a context,
to understand their true meaning.
Wikipedia and Wiktionary.
Once again they are great tools for ambiguous words.
You just find the most accurate meaning
and then open a corresponding Russian article.
Books, if they are mentioned in the video.
You can find the official
translations of such books.
This will help you translate some tricky terminology.
StarDict.
Especially the Oxford dictionaries
that you can additionally install in this program.
StarDict has a great
fuzzy search implementation.
So it's perfect for finding unknown words when you are not sure about the spelling.
Merriam-Webster it's a great tool for finding new English words.
Urban Dictionary this one
is a GREAT tool for America slang!
Although I'm not sure how reliable it is,
but still it's very powerful in complex cases.
You can also modify and develop your own tools, to optimize
dubbing quality and performance.
And I will talk about that in the future episodes.
A challenge that you will most probably face
Is that you actually don't know Russian so well to make the translations professionally.
That's very underestimated thing that many non-professional dubbers and article translators have.
Hopefully this exercise will encourage you to stop reading any article translations.
As quickly as possible.
You probably have no clue how inaccurate they are on average.
Okay. Now in summary,
don't use Russian when you are learning English.
And this will mostly affect your speaking.
Start gradually replacing Russian content with English content.
And that's very good for reading and listening.
Prefer English over Russian when taking notes,
if you want to improve your writing.
Stop using
Russian localization on any of your devices,
to improve reading.
Find ugly parts of the language
in Google to improve writing.
Practice accurate pronunciation to improve listening,
and speaking of course.
Think in English when you are walking outside,
to improve speaking.
Simplify your thoughts to improve speaking first of all
Memorize valid phrases and use them
to build new valid phrases.
And it's a very powerful technique for speaking as well.
Listen and dub
videos that you personally enjoy,
to improve almost everything.
And the last thing I'd like to say
is you need to choose your techniques wisely.
Start asking questions like what skill I'm trying to improve?
Is it reading, speaking or something else?
Did this particular technique really help me with this skill?
Is there a scientific evidence that this technique actually works?
Or the opposite thing
Is there an evidence that this technique definitely doesn't work?
There are quite a lot of researches on this topic nowadays.
Nu i vse na etom...
That's it!
Press Like button if you like the video!
Share it with friends who currently learn English!
Subscribe to the channel!
Ring the bell!
And keep in mind, I gave you techniques that worked for me,
you need to find techniques that will work good for YOU!
And if you already know some cool tricks that WORKED for YOU — share it in the comments down below the video!
If you are seriously intended
to achieve Advanced level and higher — then visit codonaft.com
where I left a few more advanced techniques which I use as well.
This was Sasha, see you soon!